In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 1127-30.

A Multilingual Database of Idioms
Aline Villavicencio , Timothy Baldwin , Benjamin Waldron

University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory, William Gates Building,
JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0FD, UK {av208,bmw20}@cl.cam.ac.uk †
CSLI, Ventura Hall, Stanford University Stanford, CA 94305-4115, USA
tbaldwin@csli.stanford.edu Abstract

This paper presents a possible architecture for a multilingual
database of idioms. We discuss the challenges that idioms present to
the creation of such a database and propose a possible encoding that
maximises the amount of information that can be stored for different
languages. Such a resource provides important information for
linguistic, computational linguistic and psycholinguistic use, and
allows for the comparison of different phenomena in different
languages. This can provide the basis for a better understanding of
regularities in idioms across languages.

1. Introduction

This work is concerned with enabling the creation of a multilingual
database of idioms. Idioms are often defined as a group of words which
have a different meaning when used together from the one it would have
if the meaning of each word were taken individually (Collins, 2000).
1 They comprise expressions like spill the beans, kick the bucket and
pull strings, that are usually employed in everyday language to
precisely express ideas and concepts that cannot be compressed into a
single word. Even though some idioms are fixed, and do not present
internal variation, such as ad hoc, there is also a large proportion
of idioms that allow different degrees of internal variability, and
with a variable number of elements. For example, the idiom spill the
beans allows internal modification (spill mountains of beans),
passivization (The beans were spilled on the latest edition of the
report), topicalization (The beans, the opposition spilled), and so
on. As we can see, idioms are a highly heterogeneous kind of multiword
expression, ranging from (semi-)fixed cases (e.g. kick the bucket)
which only allow morphological inﬂection, to more ﬂexible ones
(e.g. spill the beans) which can undergo different types of syntactic
variation and modification (Nunberg et al., 1994). Moreover, for the
later case, the type of syntactic variation that these idioms allow is
highly unpredictable (Riehemann, 2001). Even if these works focus
their discussion on idioms in English, the same phenomena can also be
found in idioms in other languages. Such variation tends to be a
challenge for their successful (computational) linguistic treatment
(Sag et al., 2002). In linguistics, for example, they have been often
used as evidence for or against the properties of grammatical theories
(e.g. must “syntactic theory” include transformational operations?
from Nunberg et al. (1994)). In computational linguistics, for
applications such as machine translation, appropriate
understanding/treatment of idioms is necessary for these systems to be
able to deal with natural languages, and avoid the generation of
unnatural or nonsensical sentences in the target language. There are
even cases where a pair of corresponding idioms in two different
languages may share the same properties (e.g. the other side of the
coin in English and its literal translation in Portuguese o outro lado
da moeda, which is also a noun phrase idiom) But exactly how much
variation do these idioms have?  What is the proportion of idioms that
are fixed in a given language?  And what proportion have equivalents
in other languages? Having access to a multilingual database of cases
and being able to analyse them can give us some insight into the
nature of idioms, and into what is required of a proper treatment of
idioms crosslingually. In this work we propose an encoding that
supports the collection of idioms in several languages, and the
mapping of equivalent parts.

2.

Idioms across Languages

Idioms are commonly thought of as metaphors that have became fixed or
fossilized over time. While in some cases the metaphor is transparent
and can be easily understood even by non-native speakers (e.g. kill
two birds with one stone as achieve two things at the same time), in
other cases the metaphor is opaque and if the idiom is not known by
the hearer, it can lead to misinterpretations (e.g. kick the bucket as
die). Some of these metaphors can be found in idioms across languages,
and in some cases, in very similar idioms. For instance, one idiom
that can be found in both English and Portuguese that shows full
lexical, syntactic and semantic correspondence is in the red, which is
no vermelho in Portuguese, where no is the contraction of in + the and
vermelho means red, and both idioms are prepositional phrases (PPs)
and have the same meaning. However, there is a large range of
variation to be found in idiom pairs across languages, and some idioms
do not have such a direct mapping, and may differ in one or more ways
and/or may allow different forms of modification/variation. For
example, some idiom pairs are syntactically and semantically but not
lexically equivalent. One example is in the black and its Portuguese
counterpart no azul (in the blue), where both are PP idioms and the
only difference is in the choice of colour (blue instead of black), or
alternatively bring the curtain down on and its counterpart botar um
ponto final em (put the final dot in) that are both verbal
constructions. There are also idioms that are semantically equivalent,
but realised using different constructions across languages. For
example, in a corner and encurralado (meaning cornered) are
semantically equivalent but realised by different constructions – a PP
in English and an adjective in Portuguese). Finally, some idioms have
multiple idiomatic equivalents in a second language, while others have
none, and this information is also of importance (see Tanaka and
Baldwin (2003) for a discussion of English and Japanese compound nouns
in the context of a machine translation task). The challenge is then
to define a database design which is capable of encoding all the
variation found in these phenomena as well as the correspondences
between them in a common format. We propose a database design that can
be used for such a task, allowing the maximum amount of information to
be stored about an idiom and its counterparts in different languages.

order. One example is new blood in English, where the adjective
precedes the noun, and its equivalent in Portuguese sangue novo (blood
new), where the adjective follows the noun. If more than one
equivalent exists, then the same process applies to each of the
equivalents. After that, or if there are no equivalents, the next
idiom is displayed and the user goes through the same process.

4. Test Data

In order to test the design, the database currently contains a sample
of 100 high-frequency2 English idioms extracted randomly from the
Collins Cobuild Dictionary of Idioms (Villavicencio and Copestake,
2002). This is used as the starting point (source language seed) to
collect translation-equivalent idioms in other languages. Initially,
it is this mapping between English and other languages that is being
tested, but the goal is to extend the database to support mappings
between idioms in any two languages. This database can be accessed
locally and also through a web interface, allowing users in different
locations to browse the database and provide information about idioms
in their native language.

3. A Possible Architecture

A typical session starts with the user entering some identification
information, specifying his/her native language and then choosing a
source language to be mapped to the target language (by default the
user’s native language). All idioms from the source language are then
made available to the user, who can browse through them, and enter the
idiomatic equivalent(s) in the target language. For each idiom, the
user is presented with an explanation of the meaning of the idiom and
an example (both in English). The user is then asked to provide
information about its syntactic variation (e.g. Can the idiom be
topicalised?, Does it allow internal modification?, etc), and about
its mapping to the source language (if it exists). As discussed in
Section 2., for a particular language pair, there may be considerable
variation in the realisation of equivalent idioms. In order to capture
this variation, we adopt the following procedure: 1. If the idiom in
the target language is lexically, syntactically and semantically
equivalent to the idiom in the source language (e.g. in the red and no
vermelho), the user is asked to provide a word-to-word mapping of the
idiom; 2. Otherwise if they are syntactically and semantically
equivalent, but not lexically (e.g. in the black and no azul), the
user is asked to provide the mapping between the corresponding words,
and for those that are lexically distinct, a translation to the source
language; 3. Otherwise if they are only semantically equivalent, the
user is asked to input each word of the idiom and its translation to
the source language. For each of these cases, the position of the word
in the idiom is also recorded, to account for variations in word

5.

Web Interface

The first step in the annotation process is to stipulate the target
language, and optionally select the English idiom index number from
which to start the annotation. At the present time, language selection
is string-based and not normalized in any way, to avoid restricting
the scope of annotation to any closed set of languages. The interface
additionally has a cookie-based facility to identify the annotator for
data maintenance purposes and also consistency in multi-session
annotations. Having chosen the language, the annotator works through
each of the 100 English idioms in turn, supplying equivalent idiom(s)
in the target language. For each target language idiom, the annotator
is asked to give a monolingual judgement on its internal
modifiability, and an evaluation of its lexical and syntactic
equivalence to the source language idiom. In Figure 1, we provide a
screen shot of the annotations for no azul as a translation for in the
black. The interface next presents the annotator with an alignment
window to indicate lexical correspondences between the two idioms. In
the case of target language idioms which are lexically equivalent to
the source language idiom, this consists of matching up each target
language word with its corresponding source language word(s), and the
interface simply presents the annotator with a list of source language
word indices with which to perform the alignment (see Figure 2 for the
case of new blood and sangue novo); on submitting the alignment, the
system then checks that the alignment is maximal—i.e. that all words
map onto one or more words in the opposing language—and issues a
warnFlagged by the editors of the Collins Cobuild Dictionary of Idioms
as occurring “at least once in every 2 million words of (their)
corpus”.  2

Figure 1: Providing a translation and basic idiom properties

Figure 3: Word alignment (2) ure 1). The web interface is publicly
accessible at lingo. stanford.edu/cgi-bin/annotate/mli.cgi in the form
of a CGI script.

6.

Lexical Database

Figure 2: Word alignment (1) ing in the case that any non-connected
words are found.3 If the idioms are not lexically equivalent, on the
other hand, an additional column is supplied for translation glosses
of non-aligned words in the target language idiom (see Figure 3 for
the case of in the black and no azul). Note that it is possible for
there to be partial lexical correspondence (as seen for no with in
the), and for this reason, we provide the word alignment facility as
for lexically-equivalent idioms. We do, however, check for the
existence of both aligned and glossed target language words
(indicating nonlexical equivalence). In the case that these conditions
are not met, a warning message is issued. At present, we do not
attempt to make any further classification of the nature of mismatch
for idioms that are not syntactically equivalent, nor do we attempt to
classify the construction type of syntactically-equivalent
idioms. After annotating each idiom pair, the annotator is given the
option of adding an additional translation for the source language
idiom, or alternatively proceeding to the next idiom. Additionally,
the annotator can ﬂag a source language idiom as having no target
language equivalent (see FigNote that it is arguably possible for a
lexically-equivalent idiom to not strictly align between
languages. E.g., the Japanese translation of in the black is kuroji,
which is lexically equivalent to black. It is possible to argue that
in and the are function words and that the two idioms are thus
lexically equivalent in terms of their content words.  3

The work reported in the paper relates to a larger project to develop
a lexical database (Copestake et al., 2004). This lexical database is
primarily for use within a grammar development environment. It
provides a resource for the association of stems with grammatical,
that is syntactic and semantic, information. In addition to
grammatical information entries are associated with bookkeeping
information (such as language and dialect) and other information. For
example by linking to a semantic database containing detailed
fully-expanded lexical semantics we can provide an efficient index for
generation, or a data source for purposes. The existence of such a
base lexical component within a grammar development environment
provides a number of advantages over alternative approaches, including
ease of maintainance, efficiency, and the benefits gained by utilising
bookkeeping information and data from secondary sources. By taking
advantage of database functionality we can link idioms in the database
of idioms discussed in the this paper with idiomatic entries in the
lexical database. As well as basic simplex lexical entries such as
bombard the lexical database supports multiword expressions. These we
may divide into two classes: those which allow for internal variation,
and those which do not. Consider firstly those idioms which allow for
internal variation; for example spill the beans and variations
thereof. In the lexical database we associate each such idiom with a
template. This template specifies the necessary syntactic and semantic
components of the idiom. For example spill the beans and rock the boat
are syntactically composed of a verb and associated object; in the
first case we require that the verb be (an idiomatic form of) the verb
spill; in the second case, we require (an idiomatic form of) the verb
rock; and so on. We also require that the simplex lexicon be augmented
to include entries for these idiomatic word forms (these idiomatic
simplex forms are generated by overriding certain grammatical
information in the non-idiomatic basic simplex entry; e.g. the
idiomatic spill differs only from the non-idiomatic spill in
specifying an idiomatic semantics). For a discussion of a specific
approach to encoding such idioms within a grammar see (Copestake et
al., 2002). Those idioms which do not allow for internal variation (ad
hoc being an example) may trivially be treated in the same manner as
basic simplex entries. The two classes of idiom outlined above are
stored within distinct tables in the lexical database, each idiom
being indexed by a unique identifier. Using the identifiers of the
idioms in the two data sources, entries in the database of idioms are
linked to the grammatical and other information contained in the
lexical database, and via the lexical database to further potentially
useful sources of information.

This document was generated partly in the context of the DeepThought
project, funded under the Thematic Programme User-friendly Information
Society of the 5th Framework Programme of the European Community
(Contract No. IST-2001-37836).

10.

References

7. Discussion

The multilingual idiom database provides important information for
linguistic, computational linguistic and psycholinguistic use, and
allows for the comparison of different phenomena in different
languages. For instance, it may be the case that families of languages
have very similar idiom equivalents and the same patterns of
modification within them, and this can provide the basis for a better
understanding of regularities in idioms across
languages. Orthogonally, the semantic mappings may provide evidence
supporting the claim that languages base idioms on common metaphors
(Neumann, 1999). Moreover, the possibility of analyzing the different
degrees of ﬂexibility allowed by different languages for the same
idiom is also valuable (e.g. in analysing idiom avoidance in
bilinguals (Laufer, 2000)), and the presence (or absence) of certain
idioms in different languages may also be of interest (e.g. for
historical studies). Finally, such a database may contain data from
different speakers of the same language, and provide grounds for
investigation of the variation in individuals’ intuitions into,
e.g. modification effects and semantic alignment.

8. Conclusion

This paper has outlined the architecture of a multilingual database of
idioms. The database is set up to capture basic monolingual and
crosslinguistic properties of idioms in a uniform fashion, via an
English “interlingua” which is additionally linked to an implemented
grammar of English. Our primary short-term objective is to populate
the database with as many languages as possible and proceed with a
crosslinguistic study of idioms. We also hope to expand the scope of
the annotation process to analyze the syntactic correspondences
between idioms in different languages.

Collins. 2000. Collins Cobuild Dictionary of Idioms. Harper Collins
Publishers. Ann Copestake, Fabre Lambeau, Aline Villavicencio, Francis
Bond, Ivan Sag Timothy Baldwin, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: Linguistic Precision and Reusability. In In Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference On Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-2002), Las Palmas, Canary Islands. Ann Copestake,
Fabre Lambeau, Benjamin Waldron, Francis Bond, Dan Flickinger, and
Stephan Oepen. 2004. A Lexicon Module for a Grammar Development
Environment. In 4th International Conference On Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC-2004, Lisbon, Portugal. Batia Laufer. 2000. Avoidance
of idioms in a second language: The effect of L1-L2 degree of
similarity. Studia Linguistica, 54(2):186–96. Christoph
Neumann. 1999. Formal languages for fuzzy subjects-modality, metaphor
and machine translation. Ph.D. thesis, Tokyo Institute of Technology
Dissertation. Geoffrey Nunberg, Ivan A. Sag, and Thomas
Wasow. 1994. Idioms. Language, 70:491–538. Susanne Riehemann. 2001. A
Constructional Approach to Idioms and Word Formation. Ph.D. thesis,
Stanford. Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copestake, and
Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions: A pain in the neck for
NLP. In Proc. of the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLing-2002), pages 1–15,
Mexico City, Mexico. Takaaki Tanaka and Timothy
Baldwin. 2003. Noun-noun compound machine translation: A feasibility
study on shallow processing. In Proceedings of the ACL-2003 Workshop
on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, pages
17–24, Sapporo. Aline Villavicencio and Ann Copestake. 2002. The
nature of idioms. LinGO Working Paper No. 2002-04.

9. Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by the Research Collaboration
between NTT Communication Science Research Laboratories, Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation and CSLI, Stanford University, and
also the National Science Foundation under Grant No. BCS-0094638.
